[Music]
what about Dark Energy though that's not
a particle well we don't well we don't
know Harry har Harry I'm going to throw
this one over to you Harry when particle
physicists try to talk about Dark Energy
things go really badly wrong the actual
truth is that particles aren't really
the fundamental ingredients of the
universe and the particles are actually
like little vibrations in that field
they're like ripples in an ocean if you
like maybe dark energy is all the kind
of quantum fluctuations that's left over
but if you run the numbers you get an
answer that is 10 the power 120 times
too big if it was that big the universe
would be ripped apart in an instant so
that suggests there must be more stuff
that we we haven't found
yet this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
here you're a personal astrophysicist
Chuck Nice there hey man what's
happening can I say you're their
personal comedian uh no okay do not
involve yourself with me on a personal
basis at all okay okay take it back take
it back uh today is going to be a cosmic
queries yes yeah but not after we
learned some stuff yeah yeah and it's
good stuff it's some good stuff all
right it's going to be on particle
physics
wow I didn't know it was going to be
that
good you know I know a little bit about
particle physics but I'm not an expert
okay so anytime we hit this kind of
impass got to bring in the expert right
on and where's sort of the best particle
physics in the world happening uh the
the collider yeah the
collider that's a start okay yeah yeah
it'll be a collider where it's going to
happen uh we've got someone who's worked
at CERN right in Geneva right and he's a
particle physicist at the University of
Cambridge in the UK oh dear help me
welcome Harry Cliff Harry welcome to
start talk Harry great to talk to you
thanks for having me yeah so you worked
with the Large Hadron Collider which is
one of the experiments of CERN and what
did you do what was your role with that
well I still work on it actually so the
LHC is this massive 19 Mile ring buried
underground and there are actually Four
experiments on the ring so these four
places where we smash particles together
and I work on one of them which is
called lhcb and the b stands for beauty
which is a type of particle that we're
interested in studying so that I still
work there I analyze data look for
places where our current theory might
break down although we haven't found in
it yet which is a bit frustrating
although we're getting some hints but
that's the that's the general job it's
going through loads and loads of data
trying to find places where we're seeing
new effects we've not seen before wa
Beauty that's not one the names on one
of the quarks is it it is yeah yeah so
there are these six quarks that make up
well two of them make up the nucleus of
the atom and then there are four others
and they have weird names so the first
two that were found after the original
two were called strange and charm and
then the last two there was this
disagreement about what to call them
some people wanted to call them truth
and Beauty which is really lovely and
poetic but in the end most physicists
call them top and bottom which is you
know a little bit boring but because we
work on these particles we study these B
quarks we rather be known as Beauty
physicist than bottom physicist so it
for us at least it's Beauty it's got
It's got my vote okay yeah Beauty yeah
truth and Beauty I I gotta say though I
uh I just think uh you know top and
bottom might be uh a bit more
interesting in some respects
[Laughter]
it's a family show okay all right and
and Harry you you left off the the uh up
and down Quirk so completing the family
of six quirks so we get up and down up
and down yeah that's right strange and
Charmed yep truth and Beauty top and
bottom that's it top and bottom exactly
that's right that's right six as far as
we know maybe there's more but we've
only found six okay so you're a quark
man we got to love the Quark people and
I I delighted just cuz I reach the
public often that you've written two
popular level books I love it and I'm
looking at the title of your first one
how to make an apple pie from scratch
and search for the recipe of our
universe oh wow well that's that evokes
something Carl Sean said
1980 uh Cosmos okay he said how do you
make an apple pie he say start with a
big bang so was that does that Inspire
this title yeah absolutely yeah that
scene I think it's episode five where
he's sitting in he's actually sitting in
Cambridge in Trinity College and this
apple pie is brought out to him and he
looks at the camera with a little
twinkle in his eye and says if you wish
to make an apple pie from scratch you
must first invent the universe and then
he kind of goes off to talk about how
the atoms in the apple pie were made
inside Stars so it's kind of like it's
quite a well-known phrase in physics I
it came up like during my University
education so it was kind of I thought it
was a neat way of talking about you know
what the universe is made from but
through the lens of trying to find out
how you make an apple pie but a really
complicated recipe let's get down to
Basics yeah I was going to say I me I'm
going to be honest though it's a it's a
long walk around the block to get to an
apple pie from start univers good good
things take a while you know but it's
cool it works 13.8 billion years but I'm
especially delighted by your recently
published book I love this title space
Oddities that's very David Bowie of you
space OD space Oddities in fact that was
his first hit did you know this David
Bowie's first hit was space aity oh okay
yeah ground control to
that's what put him on the map and
that's that's the title The subtitle is
the mysterious anomalies challenging our
understanding of the universe oo ooh
interesting and it's based on that that
we solicited questions from our audience
from our patreon supporters we'll get to
those in a minute but I want to First
extract more physics out of you tell us
more about our inventory of fundamental
particles are we there yet
if if we're there I'll be out of a job
so I really hope there's more we know
about 17 particles in total at the
moment so there are the six quarks that
we've already talked about two of which
make up the nucleus of the atom then
there's the electron which goes around
the atom and the electron also comes in
this triplet there are three electron
likee particles the next one's called
the muon and then something called a
towel so that's another three that gets
you to nine and then there are three
neutrinos these like ghostly particles
that zip through the universe and
through us and we don't really notice
most of the time so that gives you 12
what we call matter particles in total
neutrinos are related to the three
species of electrons right so they
exactly can we think of them as a family
yeah exactly so the electron has a
partner called the electron neutrino the
muon has its own version neutrino and
the same for the towel so yeah you got
these 12 particles I mean that in itself
is a mystery because they come in these
like three copies these what we call the
generations and we don't know why it's
very mysterious so it's kind of like we
have these Lego bricks in our set but we
don't understand why we have these
particular pieces and then there are the
forces so there are three forces in our
kind of quantum description of the world
we don't include gravity don't know how
to deal with that yet but we've got the
electromagnetic force the weak force and
the strong force and they each have
particles so the photon is the particle
of light that goes with electromagnetism
something called a gluon which is the
particle of the strong force that sticks
the quarks together and then the W and
Zed bosons which are the particles of
the weak Force which is this weird Force
related to Radioactive processes and
other things 16 in total and then the
last one which was found about a decade
ago at the LHC which is the higs boson
so that kind of finishes off our 17
particles in what we call the standard
model but we don't think that's the end
of the story for lots of reasons mostly
to do with astronomy actually thanks to
you know you and your colleagues
discovering this inconvenient stuff out
there in the universe called Dark Matter
so that suggests there must be more
stuff that we we haven't found yet
interesting yeah whatever dark matter is
we have no idea and maybe these guys
will find it in their particle
accelerator right and if they do we'd be
very happy because right now it's it's
just this term in our equations right
it's like but we know it's something
something's there something's there so
we throw it in the equation right and
let somebody else figure out what the
hell is what the what the something is
what about Dark Energy though because
that's not a particle well we don't well
we don't know Harry Harry Harry Harry
I'm going to throw this one over to you
Harry I mean yeah no we have no idea
right we have absolutely no idea I think
it's fair to say I mean this is when
particle physicists try to talk about
Dark Energy things go really badly wrong
so I should be careful but there was
this original well the idea one idea for
what dark energy is is what we call
vacuum energy so it's the energy left
over an empty space once you've taken
away everything else all the atoms and
all the particles and in particle
physics the actual truth is that
particles aren't really the fundamental
ingredients of the universe they are
actually made of something more
fundamental which is called a Quantum
field so for all of these 17 particles
we talked about there is a a
corresponding field and the particles
are actually like little vibrations in
that field they're like ripples in an
ocean if you like so those fields even
when you've got rid of all the particles
they're still there in the vacuum and if
you take the idea was that maybe dark
energy is all the kind of quantum
fluctuations that's left over in these
fields in the vacuum but if you run the
numbers you find you get an answer that
is 10 to the power 120 times too big so
that's 10 with a 120 zeros at the end
which is like a ludicrously enormous
number if it was that big the universe
would be ripped apart in an instant so
we have no idea what's going on really
from a particle physics point of view so
it's the it's the biggest discrepancy
ever between a theory and an observation
however couldn't there also be something
else since we don't know what that is
couldn't there be something else that's
tamping that the tamping the field so
that it isn't ripping now you're just
making stuff up I mean but I mean that's
just as that's just as feasible as a
field I mean no you're dead right like
this this is what theorists do they go
okay this numers crazy so let's add in
another thing that cancels out that's
exactly what people try to do so you
know you could be a theoretical particle
physicist this is just perhaps semantics
but of your 16 particles uh plus the
higs Bon and minus the three Force
carriers so that takes us down to 13 I
think do you count their
antimatter versions of those particles
as separate particles yeah I mean you
could you could multiply that number
many times so like the quarks for
example the version of electric charge
for the strong force called color and
whereas with electric charge there's
only one type of electric charge in the
strong force there are three they're
called red green and blue so you get red
quarks green quarks and blue quarks
bizarrely so that means actually there
aren't six quarks there are 18 if you
add in the anti quarks that gives you 36
so you can go up to like crazy numbers
if you take all these things into
account but basically the
antiparticles they exist in the same
field so you have you like your electron
field an electron or an anti-electron
are just different sorts of vibrations
but in the same field field we tend to
just count that as like one thing not
two and if you because if you start
doing that you you it gets mad okay
interesting clarify that we were talking
about the lifespan of particles uh
before the show and you me offline
offline and you mentioned that you
measured a particle I don't it's for his
PhD thesis for your PhD thesis measured
the particle and the last it's its
lifespan was one trillionth of a second
and you said that that was relatively
long yeah I mean there are only a a
couple of very privileged particles that
live forever there's the electron that
we think lives forever and the proton
that lives forever everything else
decays eventually even like the neutron
if you have a neutron floating about in
space it will decay in about 15 minutes
so as you get heavier and heavier
particles tend to Decay interesting yeah
15 minutes that's it if you break off a
neutron and set it free 15 minutes later
it just goes it go well it turns into a
proton and and an an you tell me what
what are the Decay products of it turns
into a proton an electron and an anti
nutrino you get three things out ah
gotcha okay and here's something cool I
I want to show off the little bit of
particle physics I know okay you hear
what he said your Neutron becomes a
proton an electron and an antio okay now
watch the kind of particle the neutron
is you can end up with something that
isn't that kind of particle when you're
done okay through these conservation
laws it's okay for the neutron to become
a proton but wait a minute the proton
has a plus one charge right so now you
got to some got got cancel that out
cancel that out so we cancel that with a
what um wait the proton has a oh the the
oh wait wait the proton so it's a proton
plus one plus one who's got a minus one
that's electron electron boom he said
so those cancel we're good however we
now have an electron that's a kind of
particle that we didn't start with we
got to undo the fact that we now have an
electron oh cuz you got to need the
conservation you got to conserv how do
you get rid of the fact that you now
have an electron you and the electron is
paired up with these neut neutrinos and
what do he say you not only get the
electron you get the anti neutrino anti
neutrino canceling out the electron now
that's a great way to balance this out
but my question is do these things are
these things actually here or are you
just saying okay we need this to cancel
it out well take us there yeah are were
these hypothesis that we require of the
universe or were these observations that
the Universe requires of us oh that was
a good that was a good one I liked it I
liked it a lot well I mean I guess it
goes back to 1896 so hre Beckel French
uh physicist famously discovered
radioactivity in his lab when he left
these uranium salts on top of a piece of
photog graic paper and he saw that even
when there was like a bit of card in
between the salt and the paper the the
photographic film got exposed so that
was what what he was seeing there were
prot were neutrons decaying into protons
basically that was the radiation that
was being emitted by those uranium salts
so we kind of knew about this process it
was called Betto Decay back in those
days and and then Ernest Rutherford and
others studied it in the late 19th
century so we kind of knew about this
process way before we even knew what a
neutron was that took another four 40
years or so so the phenomena appeared
first it took a lot longer to actually
figure out what was going on the beta
particle was the electron correct yeah
exactly that's right yeah because at the
time we didn't know about neutrons
neutrons would come we didn't know about
neutrons until 1930 so we had to have
clumsy other language to account for
this okay yeah so you're saying that the
universe is requiring it of us right to
recognize these properties and they
become rather helpful correct in in
calculations you do and predictions you
make yeah I mean this whole the whole
subject of particle physics it's kind of
built on this idea of mathematical
symmetry these symmetries that are
either respected or broken and that
generates this very powerful
mathematical description of the universe
and I mean this like this way of looking
at the world is extraordinarily
successful like to give you like an
example how amazing this theory is one
there's one quantity that we can what
example of a quantity you can use to
calculate is the the magnetism of the
electrons the electron
as well as having an electric charge it
behaves like a little magnet and limits
a magnetic field and you can calculate
how strong that little magnet should be
to one part in I think now 10 billion
and if you do an experiment a really
really precise experiment you get the
same number to 10 decimal places which
is crazy so this this this kind of way
of looking at the word is incredibly
powerful um but at the same time we know
we're massively missing something
because we don't know what dark matter
is or dark energy or any of this other
stuff so it's this amazingly successful
Theory but also
incomplete yeah it's it's you know
enough about the universe to quantify
your ignorance yeah I'm going to say
yeah without anything you get to 10 10
places you you you pretty much nailed it
yeah you nailed it you nailed it in a
digital world filled with endless tools
and distractions wanted use a web
browser that is everything you need in
one place meet Opera 1 R2 the browser
that simplifies your online experience
if you're like me with too many tabs
open that you don't know what to do with
tab Islands can help you stay organized
and save space simply organize your web
pages by context and collapse the ones
you're not using tab traces on the other
hand help you figure out which tabs you
visited most recently the darker the
underscore the more recently You'
visited a certain tab or let's say
you're doing research and want to get
more information on something in an
article Arya is an integrated AI feature
that can get you answers quickly with a
few simple keystrokes no new tabs
required want to generate an image with
a single prompt you can do that thanks
to image generation or perhaps you want
more information about an image Arya can
do that as well what if you're doing
research and you need to reference two
articles at the same time with Opera's
split screen feature just drag and drop
to view them simultaneously and since we
know you're listening to Star Talk while
working don't worry we won't tell you
can now use Opera's floating player
without interrupting your browsing
experience play pause fast forward or
move the player around your screen or
even outside the browser from Smart AI
assistance to powerful productivity
tools to customization you can download
Opera by heading to the link in the
description now back to the show let's
go to our questions now by the way they
were our patreon supporters these are
patrons of Star Talk yes uh they are
occasionally solicited for questions
they might have specifically tuned for
the guest so you're not in studio with
us you're coming to us from London but
that doesn't matter to the questioners
they don't care where you are all right
we go what you got check he says hi Star
Talk team Andrew here from Cork City
Ireland Dr Cliff can you please explain
how your research on CP violation in
bmon uh contributes to our understanding
of the matter antimatter asymmetry
in the universe thanks a million I like
that let me let me te this up okay
because I can do the astronomy part of
this and then he can go in to the
particle physic part of it right so you
look in the early Universe you have
matter and there's energy there and
matter and energy we know are equivalent
right and from this from this bath of
energy can spontaneously make particles
and if you do that the laws of symmetry
of the universe say the particles are
matter antimatter pairs they came out of
nothing you got be a to come back
together and be again okay so you got
the and this is just going on okay and
but at some point the universe out of
this soup of energy created one extra M
particle for every hundred million
particles that it made and so in the
dance off all the pairs go away so
that's Annihilation Annihilation anation
Annihilation and there one person left
it's got nobody to annihilate with that
is everything we know and love in this
universe that we call matter so wait all
matter yes from that one wait yeah yes
all matter yes yes everything else was a
is a photon everything else turned into
energy from this left over just the one
out of a 100 million playing playing
musical chairs in in a musical chairs
everybody pairs off and they're happy
right and then you think everybody's
paired and then one person is left and
there's no one to pair it with ever more
and that makes up everything all the
matter that we love and know in this
universe so Harry why did you do
this I mean I wish I could claim
responsibility for the existence of the
universe well I mean yeah this is a big
problem as you say because like we see
this in experiments when we bang
particles together at the Large Hadron
Collider you always see equal numbers of
particles and antiparticles being made
so this is what happens so the question
is how did you get this asymmetry and
there was a Russian physicist back in
the 70s I think called Andre sakarov who
came up with three conditions that had
to be satisf ified to allow matter to
win this battle with antimatter in the
early Universe the first one pretty
obviously is you need a process that
makes more particles than antiparticles
that's number one the second one though
is this condition known as CP violation
so CH CP stands for charge parity which
is a sort of symmetry that relates
matter to antimatter it's kind of like a
mirror if you put matter in the CP
mirror uh it shows up as antimatter so
what we're looking for are processes
that violate this symmetry and these bz
that the questioner asked about so these
are particles which contain a beauty
quark and another Quark so like a paired
up with an antiquark usually and there
are a particular type of these particles
that do this really weird dance where
you create one of these B mesons and as
it travels through your experiment it
oscillates backwards and forwards
between matter and antimatter so it will
flip its identity with this very nice
sort of periodic way and you can what
you then do is you watch How often often
does it decay in the matter State and
how often does it decay in the
antimatter State and you measure the
difference and if you see a difference
that tells you that the laws of the
universe violate this this CP symmetry
this symmetry between matter and
antimatter so this is the kind of key
ingredient one of the key ingredients we
need to explain this mystery the
universe has the power to violate its
own laws by this process yeah exactly so
this was first discovered uh I don't
know back in the 80s originally and
we're studying it in lots of different
particles now so we know that this CP
symmetry is broken which is a good thing
because if it wasn't we wouldn't be here
but the mystery is our current the
particles we know about don't break it
enough so the Symmetry is is very is
only very slightly broken and we need
way more of this symmetry breaking to
explain the fact that we exist and the
universe is is there to look at I didn't
know we had any mechanism at all to
break the Symmetry
I'm cockal are warmed by this by this
knowledge well okay next question that
is fascinating stuff okay uh this is sa
sain sakar friend of ours is matter
antimatter asymmetry the cause for the
Big Bang we just talked about it but
could that I mean are you going to make
a big bang man in your in your yeah yeah
what are you hiding from
us yeah astrophysically it's it happens
much later okay than the formation of
the universe but with your large hron
collider you are probing the conditions
that would have prevailed at the Big
Bang itself or very close to the very
beginning so do you think that this I'm
re wording this question that this
matter antimatter asymmetry would have
mattered before it otherwise mattered
astrophysically in the universe I mean
it's not we don't really know when the
process that broke the Symmetry happened
it could have H so the LHC as you say
it's kind of recreating the conditions
of the big bang and we're probing
conditions that existed about a
trillionth of a second after Time Zero
if there was ever such a thing so that's
kind of where we at and that there is a
possibility that that was the moment
it's all actually related to the higs
boson there was this thing that happened
about a trillionth of a second into the
universe's existence called the called
Electro week symmetry breaking which is
basically where the higs field which
gives Mass to the particles that we're
made from Switched on for the first time
and that reset the laws of well reset
the basic ingredients of the universe
set the form of the forces and it's it
was a sort of a transition a bit like um
water boiling it's like a kind of like a
change of state but a change of state of
the vacuum itself and that that may have
been the moment which created more M
than antimatter and that's why we're
doing one of the reasons we built the
LHC is to recreate those conditions to
see if we see that process happening
these phase transitions you said water
boiling going from just regular water to
boiling or even freezing right water
going it's water completely changing its
state and you now use this vocabulary
sort of loosely in the early universe or
maybe literally the universe is changing
its its state of existence are you just
saying if it's going to happen anywhere
that's where it's going to happen
because that's where there's some
serious action going down down the pipe
yeah I mean it's well theoretically you
can when you do the you sort of figure
out what this event looked like under
certain conditions you find in the
equations of the standard model that you
can make more particles than anti
particles in certain this phase
transition has to happen in a very
particular way and you actually need
more particles than exist in the
standard model so the standard model on
its own can't do it but the standard
model plus some other things can do it
but it's also possible it happened
earlier so we're talking like you know
not a trillionth of a second after the
big bang but a trillionth of a
trillionth of a trillionth of a second
so you're getting closer to Time Zero
that that helps me become more accepting
of the fact that you can blame these
trans you can blame all the weird
Oddities that are going on on these
transitional moments in the universe
right because that's where stuff is
going
down right okay excellent time for a
couple more what what else you got all
right you know I'm going to go to Magnus
here says
Magnus I am Magnus son to a fallen
father husband to a murdered wife I am
Magnus and I shall have my revenge
okay I'm sorry um that just come out of
you yeah I don't
know just sounds like what you should
say your name is magn name is Magnus
that is clearly the plight of Magnus
okay all right he says my respects Dr
Cliff um May you describe the link as
you see it between a Quantum field
Theory as the gold standard of the
standard model until now a perfect
description of our current knowledge B
VAR
versions of quantum gravity mhm uh I.E
string theory and loop quantum gravity
which depend on uh the ads CFT Duality
with or without background dependency
and just to add I'm a Swede in
Switzerland confusing
no all right okay so how it's only
confusing to Americans okay Magnus
because so what is that question I don't
I don't get the question um wait go
ahead so Harry did you follow the
question did you follow the question I I
I think so I think they were asking
about well that the relationship between
Quantum field Theory which is the
language of the standard model the
language of particle physics and string
theory and loop quantum gravity I mean I
think that was the question I mean what
I would say is that I am really
underqualified to talk about quantum
gravity not my area I think the but what
I would say is that quantum gravity
theories they say very little about
particle physics at the moment so you
know String Theory Loop quantum gravity
whatever your favorite flavor of quantum
gravity theory is it has no bearing on
any experiments that we do in in high
energy particle physics at the LHC and
we and one of the big problems with
these theories is they don't really make
testable predictions so far so I I would
love it if string theorists or someone
else could come along and say you know
if string theory is right you can do
this experiment at a collider and you'll
see this but so far that hasn't happened
so really Quantum field theory is the is
the kind of gold standard it's the
theory that works maybe it'll be
replaced by one of these theories later
but I think we're waya aways from that
interesting all right so what he says he
don't care about
gravity I'd love to include gravity I'd
love it but it's it's a hard problem
currently what is our best understanding
of the most things going on in the
universe is it just sort of Quant
Quantum field theory is that what gives
us the best understanding of everything
and maybe we'll just have to modify that
or is there something else ready to take
over all of it waiting in the wings an
umbrella to it all yeah I mean as as you
know like in modern physics we have
these two pillars of which describe
pretty much everything in physics which
are quantum field theory on the one hand
which describes particles quantum
mechanics you know all that stuff and
then we have gravity on the other on the
other hand and general relativity which
is a classical Theory a non-quantum
theory and so you have these two
separate theories but they they actually
don't really overlap with each other I
mean the only place is where you would
see Quantum gravitational effects are at
the center of black holes or at the very
earliest moments of the big bang these
really extreme conditions for everything
else these two separate theories work
perfectly well so and that's kind of the
problem actually because the only place
you get evidence for quantum gravity are
in these really extreme conditions which
we're way way away from being able to
recreate in the laboratory so that's
what makes it very difficult cool man
okay all right give me another all right
here's another one this is uh uh Fredick
Johansson who says hello fredrich here
from Northern Sweden
uh Fredick come up in the hood right
hello Fredick here from
Detroit so he says Friedrich uh here
from Northern Sweden uh do all
fundamental particles of a type have
exactly the same mass and how can we
know that oh I'd love that it's a really
cool question I'd love that yeah so are
all particles of any species identical
in every way to the limits of all
measurements I mean well because you can
you can measure it right so yeah every
electron is exactly the same as every
other electron every proton is exactly
the same as every other proton and the
reason is well protons are a bad example
actually but say electrons the electrons
are actually made of this thing called
the electron field which is is invisible
fluid like thing it's all throughout the
Universe and every electron is a little
Ripple in this same field and as a
result when you hit hit the electron
field you make an electron you make the
same type of thing everywhere so that's
why they're identical I mean you could
almost you can always argue that every
electron is the same thing it's part of
the same object so every particle of a
certain species is is absolutely
identical and indistinguishable and
that's really fundamental actually to
our understanding of particle physics
and quantum theory isn't isn't a Borg
like that yeah that is the Borg all the
members of the Borg they're not indidual
conscious wise they're all they're all
one one entity although electrons don't
come along and try and turn you into an
electron all right good the start Trek
geek I am locutus of
electron resistance is futile but part
of the question was how do you know
because you haven't measured every
electron in the universe and you're
saying you know enough about the field
to know that there's only one kind of
particle it can make in that case and
therefore you're going to get the
electron every single time that is
really cool yeah no yeah yeah oh man
okay hey Star Talk fans I don't know if
you know this but the audio version of
the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that in Spotify and apple podcast
and most other podcast Outlets that are
out there multiple ways to ingest all
that is Cosmic on Star Talk this is
yazan Al haari and he says cheers from
New Jersey okay all right I'm y an
artist and filmmaker studying relativity
I'm fascinated by how Einstein's theory
is applied to the Large Hadron Collider
where particles approach the speed of
light Dr Cliff could you explain how
relativity shapes our understanding of
these high energy collisions and whether
it might someday be possible to safely
create a small black hole somewhere in
the collider and Neil if that were
possible would you uh would you like to
throw something into that black hole
totally oh yeah okay that that we can
make it a like a like an amusement park
game know hit the black hole and then
just disappears into the singularity
that question reminds me of earlier in
our conversation so Harry you you
studied particles that decayed in a
trillionth of a second it seems to me
that can be a trillionth of a second
only at a certain speed because the
faster a particle goes the longer it
would take to Decay because its time
frame is shifted relative to The
Observer so you can't just declare a
trth of a second without specifying a
speed or is that that particle at
rest so that that trillionth of a second
is from the particles point of view so
in the frame of the particle so the
particles at rest basically so if you
were the particle you'd live a trillion
of a second but from our point of view
in the lab as you say these things are
going close to the speed of light so
they live way longer so they actually
will travel they live long enough
because of this relativistic time
dilation to fly a centimeter or so in
the experiment which if they just live a
trillion per second they wouldn't go
anywhere near that far so you're
absolutely right I mean like relativity
special relativity I should say is you
know fundamental to colliders because
what they basically do is they are E
equals MC squ machines they take e
energy kinetic energy in these
accelerated particles they bang them
together and they make M they make new
particles new matter effectively so like
it's absolutely fundamental to what
we're doing but the question about black
holes that's really general relativity
and there were some ideas back when the
LHC switched on that if there were extra
dimensions of space so extra directions
that you could move in that it would be
possible to create microscopic black
holes at the LHC and this led to load of
tabloid stories about the LHC is going
to create a black hole it's going to
swallow Geneva and swallow the rest of
the planet and we're all going to
disappear and so this caused such like a
big storm in PR the British tabloid
press actually really got a hold of the
story CERN had to create this health and
safety report which is the most exciting
risk assessment you'll ever read and it
basically describes these various
hazards one of which is like a black
hole that swallows the Earth the other
is the creation of a bubble universe
that expands to destroy the entire of
reality so they had this risk assessment
where the destruction of the universe
was one of the possible out comes and
they basically said this is very
unlikely to happen and so it's all fine
um it's unlikely and you still got money
they gave you they still let you do it
well no one's going to sue you if you
destroy the planet
right he's already thought this tell
there's a YouTube video before the large
hazra Coller was turned on but there's a
countdown to it there's a YouTube video
of the parking lot outside of CERN and
you have the clock counting down and
then it gets to zero and then the
parking lot Falls in
on itself wow and the whole it's a it's
pretty funny terrifying yeah I was going
to say it's funny if you're an astro
physicist for the rest of us it's not
funny I should I should say there is a
reason why we knew this wasn't going to
happen and that's because the universe
has been doing this experiment for
billions of years where we have protons
that hit the upper atmosphere much
higher in energy than the LHC so if this
was possible every object in the
universe would have been turned into a
black hole so we kind of knew for that
reason that wasn't going to happen all
right right there's no greater particle
accelerator than the universe universe
itself oo look at that all right all
right this is Viper who says hello Dr
Tyson Dr Cliff Lord nice I am Sam from
oalen Missour uh I am 16 and have been
wondering about tons for a few years now
I would like to I would I would like to
know more about them and if you guys can
go into more depth explaining what is
the deal with tachon oh wow okay yeah I
mean well all I all I really know about
tachon is they're hypothetical particles
that travel faster than light but I
don't think they're allowed to exist
because they would violate causality
this idea that like one event leads to
another and not the other way around so
they are I think there are things you
can kind of cook up in your equations
but they're basically forbidden they
turn up in Star Trek I think or like you
know science fiction as a way of like
facilitating time travel but all the
time but I don't think that there things
that can exist in reality but maybe Neil
may know more about this than me well
let's see what Merlin has to say about
this dear
Merlin what is a tachon rick mcfarling
Dallas Texas tachon are hypothetical
particles that travel faster than the
speed of light named for the Greek Takis
meaning Swift where we also get the word
tachometer Einstein's equations of
special relativity bestow this particle
with an array of bizarre properties here
are the top five one the slowest attach
on can move is slightly greater than the
speed of light two a tachon can have
infinite velocity three when a tachon
loses energy it speeds up when it gains
energy it slows down a tachon appears to
travel backwards in time for some
observers if you send your friends a
message with a tachon they can receive
the message before you sent
it tons have yet to be detected there
you go and there's the that'd be useful
for those emails that you forget to
reply to right that sit in your inbox
for weeks and then if you could send
them back in time that would be amazing
yeah and my favorite tachon account
would be you see someone walking down
the corridor and then they slip lip on a
banana peel but he's your friend then
you don't want them to be harmed right
so you go to a tach on texting app M
okay and you because it's already
happened so you send them a text to say
watch out for the banana peel so then
they get the text before they step on
the banana peel right okay so now the
person's walking down the corridor and
they get a text and they look at the
text and it says watch out for the and
they slip on
the because they're your text because of
your text right there it is Chuck we got
time for one maybe two more questions
actually let's go with uh Jonas drand
and Jonas says uh good morning Dr Cliff
Dr Tyson and uh astrol Lord nice okay
okay uh Jonas from the Appalachian
foothills of North Carolina here uh is
there any dark matter in my living room
oh or state it more seriously is dark
matter scattered throughout the universe
or is it all in clumps around distant
Galaxy clusters if it is present on
earth does that allow one to search for
it in settings such as your collider sir
oh I love it well thank you Jonas what a
great question when you live in the in
the hills of the appal you got a lot of
time on your hands right yeah he's
taking hikes and thinking about dark
matter you know yeah so what you got
there I mean there definitely there
would be dark matter in your living room
yeah for sure cuz we well this is
actually really astronomy rather than
particle physics but the idea is is that
every Galaxy like our own sits in this
big spherical cloud of dark matter and
the Galaxy is kind of in the middle of
this Cloud so if there a dark matter
particles floating around in the Galaxy
they're floating through us and through
the Earth and there'll be a few in the
room it depends on how massive they are
as to how many there would actually be
but yeah they' be there and that doesn't
actually help us at the LHC because at
the LHC we're trying to make them out of
energy but there are other experiments
that go live down Big M shafts where you
have tanks of really cold Zenon or other
kinds of noble gases and you wait for a
dark matter particle to drift through
the Earth hit a Zenon atom in your
detector and create a little flicker of
light and then you directly detect Dark
Matter so it's a bit like a poltergeist
moving you know throwing some Crockery
around in your living room that's kind
of what we're waiting to see but with
these detects getting more and more and
more sensitive they still haven't seen
anything which is very frustrating but
hopefully one day they'll pick something
up last question all right this is David
Smith he says hello Dr T Dr see Lord
nice Dave Smith here hailing from Naples
Florida how do you know you have found
antimatter if antimatter and matter
cancel each other out is it the violence
of the interaction the aftermath or the
moment of ever so slight when you see
the matter and antimatter just before
their epic confrontation so he made it
into a boxing match like he yeah he's
the D king of particles particles in the
Octagon exactly two particles enter one
particle leaves no no in this case two
particles enter no no particles leave oh
that's a real good fight that's a real
good fight yeah AN antia particle out in
the wilderness can you identify it as
such unless you then see it annihilate
you can yeah and actually the way it was
discovered originally was by Carl
Anderson American physicist back in 1932
so he had this thing called a cloud
chamber which this amazing instrument
that allows you to see individual
subatomic particles by they basically
create these Trails of water droplets as
they go through the chamber which you
can see as little traces and he had one
of these Chambers at Caltech in
California and he was seeing cosmic rays
coming from up out of space and you see
electrons you see protons and he had
magnetic field on his chamber and he saw
one track that would looked just like an
electron it had the same kind of form
but it was bending the wrong direction
so it was an electron with positive
charge and that was that one photograph
was enough for Anderson to say I've
discovered antimatter so but I mean now
atern there's there's a really cool
experiment called Alpha where they
actually make atoms of antimatter they
make antihydrogen and they trap it in a
magnetic bottle so you can't obviously
Keep It In A Bottle because it would
annihilate the bottle if you have a
really strong magnetic field you can
store these things and keep them stored
for hours now and then you can shine
light on them and look at spectroscopy
and do all kinds of really cool stuff so
we can actually kind of effectively
store this stuff in very small
quantities now so anti-hydrogen would be
an anti-proton with an anti-electron in
orbit around it yeah if you get a chance
to go to CERN you should visit the alfha
experiment because it's awesome and just
in all in all uh in in the interest of
disclosure regarding Carl Anderson the
existence of antimatter had just been
predicted okay right that was fery
correct d direct D direct thank you
there was some framework to even be able
to interpret that result right and so
and there it was yeah electron doing the
opposite opposite for its charge right
and but otherwise was identical to an
electron same mass same everything
that's pretty cool yeah that very cool
yeah very cool who knew I had a twin huh
an evil twin an evil twin why does that
twin have a goatee that's right that
electron has a goatee what's going on
that that's the comic strip the the
antimatter comic strip that we need all
right well listen Harry thank you for
being on Star Talk we love what you do
and we love how you talk about it and
now that you're in Arms Reach I'd love
to come back to you when we have
particle physics questions yeah be I'd
be happy to it was great talking to you
really good fun do you have a presence
on the internet do you have a handle
that people can track you down I do yeah
you can find me at my website Harry
cliff. co.uk if you want to see what I'm
up to I'm also on Twitter or X or
whatever we're calling it Harry V cliff
and your latest book The Mysterious
anomalies CH uh space Oddities the
mysterious anomalies challenging our
understanding of the universe nice and
there aren't many books about what we
don't know and that's this is just that
kind of book The the things that are
that's odd what's that you know what I
could write that book you could I could
write a whole book on what I don't know
I'm telling you right now but but you
know scientists love things we don't
understand that's that's how science
makes progress and that's what the
book's about it's about all these like
weird little effects that could be
nothing or they could be the clue to
something really big and we're sort of
trying to figure that out yeah we're
looking forward to at penguin Random
House whoa this year Big T big big time
buddy big
time all right so we good here so again
Harry thanks for joining us pleasure
Chuck always good to have you man always
a pleasure there's been yet another
installment of Star Talk Cosmic queries
particle physics Edition until next time
Neil degrass Tyson here bidding you to
keep looking up
[Music]